= Ruff! Documentation Generator User Guide (V0.4)

== Introduction

Ruff! (Runtime function formatter) is a documentation generation
system for programs written in the Tcl programming language. Ruff! is
included with Woof! but can be used independently of it. Ruff! uses
runtime introspection in conjunction with comment analysis to generate
reference manuals for Tcl programs.

In comparison with source code based documentation generators, Ruff!
produces documentation that not only requires less effort from the
programmer, but is also more complete, more accurate and more
maintainable.

Ruff! is covered by a liberal BSD open-source license that permits use
for any purpose.

== Requirements

Ruff! will run on any system that supports Tcl 8.4 or later. For Tcl
8.4, the dict extension, which is already included with later versions
of Tcl, is also required.

== Quick Start

To quickly generate HTML documentation for a namespace hierarchy, say
::app, run the following commands from inside your application after
all code has been loaded.

----
package require ruff
::ruff::document_namespaces html ::app -output app.html -recurse true
----

This will create the documentation for all classes and procs under the
::app namespace tree, in the app.html file.

== Documentation through introspection

One of the more painful exercises a programmer has to go through is
that of documenting code. Unlike the more intellectually satisfying
activities of design, coding, and even debugging, documentation is
seen, with good reason, as a grind. Moreover, burdensome enough the
initial documentation effort may be, there is the additional ongoing
chore of maintaining the documentation as the software grows and
programming interfaces evolve. Documentation through run time
introspection may help.

Several tools such as ROBODoc and Natural Docs reduce this burden by
generating documentation from comments in the source code. In addition
to documentation for individual program elements such as classes and
functions, they can also generate cross-references, table of contents
and indices.

Nevertheless, useful though they may be, these source code based
documenters have several shortcomings:

* The markup necessary for the documentation generators to locate
relevant comments adds considerable visual clutter to the source code.

* There is duplication of information as program element names, default
values and such have to be repeated in the code and in the comment
markup. As changes are made, these can easily get out of sync. In
fairness, some generators allow code fragments, such as prototypes, to
be included in the generated documentation but the result is not as
visually satisfactory.

* Even correctly naming a program element becomes an issue when the
language supports scopes through namespaces and classes. It is
difficult to establish the namespace scope for a function without
considerable sophistication in the parsing code. The generators that
try to deal with this have to rely on more markup help from the
programmer. In the case of dynamic languages, the namespaces may be
established on the fly which makes the problem unsolvable using just
source analysis. 

* Comments embedded in the source code itself, for
example to describe the behavior of an option, need to be needlessly
duplicated in the documentation markup.

The most intractable problem
though, is dealing with languages that support constructs such as
inheritance, delegation and mix-ins. There are several choices, all
unpalatable to various degrees, that can be made in documenting the
methods exposed by a class.

* The simplest is to simply ignore the inherited class elements. The
resulting documentation for the class is practically useless, for
example, when a class only specializes a single method.
+
At a small incremental cost, the programmer can choose to list the
direct ancestors in the inheritance tree. In some cases, the generator
may even do this automatically. Now the reader can at least manually
follow the links and negotiate the class hierarchy to discover the
method interface. Like the implementation effort though, the benefits
are marginal. The issues of duplication and maintenance are still
present, and manual method lookups are tedious, particularly with deep
hierarchies and multiple inheritance.

* As an extreme case, the programmer may list and link to all inherited
methods. This is such a burden that it is likely never done when
document generators are in use. Not only is the initial cost high,
maintaining accuracy as ancestors change is next to impossible. The
only time this approach might be taken is in projects with large
documentation teams whose sole job is to figuratively run behind the
programmers, mirroring their every move.

So what’s the solution to all these problems? In the case of
traditional languages, there might not be one, other than essentially
retargeting the compiler to take on the task as some implementations
have done. However, in a language like Tcl, which supports
comprehensive introspection, the information required for solving the
above issues is made available by the runtime system and can be made
use of by a documentation genrator. That is what Ruff! does.

== Basic Document Generation

Ruff! is a package that generates documentation using runtime
introspection in conjunction with smart parsing of comments in proc
and method bodies.

Runtime introspection is primarily through the Tcl info
command. Comments within proc and method bodies are also processed at
run time and not by analysing source files. Therefore, only comments
inside proc and method bodies are visible to Ruff!.

Ruff! requires almost no markup and uses wiki-like free formatting
conventions for structured text like lists.  A simple proc definition
with Ruff! markup would look like this:

----
proc character_at {str {index 0}} {
       # Fetches the character at the specified position in the string
       # str - string from which character is to be retrieved
       # index - position at which character is to be retrieved
       if {$index < 0} {
           #ruff
           # If the index has a negative value, it is taken as the position
           # from the end of the string.
           ...some code...
           # The above comment about index gets documented by Ruff! because
           # of the #ruff marker even though it appears in the middle of the
           # program body. This comment does not get picked up by Ruff! because it
           # it appears in the middle of the code and has no #ruff marker attached.
       } else {
           ...some code...
       }
   }
----

Below is the output generated by the Ruff! using the doctools plain text formatter

----
character_at str ?index?
    str
        string from which character is to be retrieved

    index
        position at which character is to be retrieved (default 0)

Fetches the character at the specified position in the string

If the index has a negative value, it is taken as the position from the 
end of the string.
----

Note the markup is not obtrusive. Refer to the documentation of the
distill_body and parse commands for the exact syntax. The source code
for Ruff! itself is the best example of comment formatting conventions
for Ruff!.

Because Ruff! gets its input purely from runtime information, to use
it to generate documentation for a set of commands or classes, it must
first be loaded into the same interpreter as those commands and
classes. Use the package command to do so as below:

----
package require ruff
----

=== Documenting a single namespace hierarchy

The simplest use of Ruff! is to generate documentation for a single
namespace or namespace hierarchy in HTML format. The command
document_namespaces accomplishes this. The following example generates
documentation for all classes and procs in the namespace
`::some_namespace` and its descendents. The output is written to the
file `some_namespace.html`.

----
package require ruff; # Loads Ruff! into the interpreter
::ruff::document_namespaces html ::some_namespace -output some_namespace.html -recurse true 
----

The above uses the built-in HTML output formatter. External formatters
like doctools require another step to be invoked and may themselves
have additional options you can use to control the final output. Refer
to the documentation for those tools for details.

=== Documenting multiple namespaces

Documentation of multiple namespaces may take one of two forms:

* All namespaces may be included in a single documentation file
* Each namespace may be documented in a separate file

An additional factor is whether the built-in HTML formatter or an
external formatter is being used.

If the internal HTML formatter is being used, multiple namespaces can
be documented in a single documentation file simply by passing
multiple namespaces as a list to the document_namespaces command. If
multiple output files are desired, then the command is invoked
separately for each namespace. In this case, however, there will be no
automatic cross-referencing or navigation menus across namespaces.

In the case where an external formatter is being used, single file
output may be generated through the use of the `-append` option to the
`document_namespaces` command:

----
::ruff::document_namespaces doctools ::some_namespace -output some_namespace.man
::ruff::document_namespaces doctools ::another_namespace -output some_namespace.man -append true
----

Both namespace are then documented in the same file. Note that some
formatters, like doctools, may not be able to process such a combined
file.

If separate output files are desired, separate files can be generated
for each namespace. Here the formatter in use has to combine these
into a single documentation set. Refer to the documentation for the
appropriate formatting tool for information on how to accomplish this.

== Advanced Document Generation

In some cases, you might want more control over the content and
structure of the documentation. For example, you may want to

* document a set of commands or classes partitioned based on something
  other than namespaces
* document classes and commands in separate reference pages
* document each class in its own reference page

Such documents may be generated through the use of the `document`
command in combination with one or more of the commands `extract`,
`extract_ooclass`, `extract_proc` and `extract_namespace`. These latter
commands extract metainformation about classes and procs in the form
of dictionaries. The combined dictionaries can then be passed to the
document command to generate the documentation.

== Controlling Output Content and Display

In addition to selecting which classes and procedures are included in
the generated documentation, it may be desirable to include or exclude
certain parts within the class or procedure. For example,
documentation for the public API of a module will should not include
private or internal functions. The following sections describe some of
the options commonly supported by Ruff! commands that affect this.

=== Using `-docstrings` to include additional documentation

A reference page may need to include additional material, such as an
overview, in addition to details about individual procs and
classes. This material may be included in the generated document
through the use of the `-docstrings` option as described in the `document`
command.

=== Using `-hidenamespace` to hide namespace qualifiers

By default, documentation generated by Ruff! includes namespace
qualifiers in all class and proc names. It is possible to have the
generated output leave out the namespace qualifers by adding the
`-hidenamespace NAMESPACE` qualifier to the document generation
commands. This provides a more visually pleasing output with less
noise, but may result in ambiguities in case of names being present in
more than one namespace. In particular, some formatters may not
cross-link correctly in such cases.

=== Using `-includeprivate` to document private procs and methods

By default, private methods and procs are not included in generated
documentation. Specifying `-includeprivate true` to a command causes
these to be included. Private methods are methods that are not
exported from a class. Private procs are procs whose names begin with
an underscore. This is not currently configurable but is likely to be
so in the future.

=== Using `-includesource` to include source code

The source code for a proc or a class method is not included in the
documentation. For internal documentation, it may be convenient to
have the source code be visible as part of documentation. Specifying
the option `-includesource true` to a command causes the source code to
be included in the documentation. It is intended that in a future
release, HTML output formats will show source code in collapsible
sections though this is not currently done.

== Ruff! Output Formatters

Ruff! can either directly generate HTML documentation using the
built-in HTML formatter, or generate formats that can be understood by
several existing tools such as ROBODoc, Natural Docs or doctools.

Each option has its advantages and disadvantages.

The internal HTML formatter offers (in the author's humble opinion) the best cross-linking and navigation support in addition to cosmetic enhancements such as tooltips and optional hiding/display of source code. It is also the simplest to use as no other external tools are required.

The external formatters have the advantage of supporting many more output formats such as PDF, plain text, Latex etc. In additional the generated documentation can be integrated into other larger documentation sets that contain documentation from other sources.

Choice of an output formatter depends on several factors:

* the end use document format desired - ROBODoc and doctools support
several output formats but the Ruff! internal formatter and Natural
Docs support only HTML;

* existing familiarity with a tool - obviously, if you are already familiar with a tool, or want to integrate Ruff! output with other documentation, it makes sense to stick with a tool you know;

* capabilities of the tool itself - some tools are better than others in some areas such as quality of output generated, automatic cross-linking and indexing, configurability etc.

In my biased opinion, Ruff! built-in HTML formatter and Natural Docs
to be the best (in that order) if you want HTML output. From a purely
formatting perspective, doctools is the most capable, and works at the
semantic level unlike other external formatters. Its HTML output is
decent and it supports many other formats as well. The biggest
drawback in my mind is that its cross-linking is very
limited. ROBODoc's strength would appear to be its support for
additional formats like XML DocBook which can be used to generate even
more output formats like Microsoft Help.

In general, it is best to try all formatters and pick one that best
meets your needs.

== Reference Manual

The Ruff! reference manual, generated using Ruff! itself, is available
at http://woof.magicsplat.com/manuals/ruff/index.html.

== Source Code and Downloads

Ruff! is an open-source project hosted at sourceforge.net. Source code
and downloadable packages can be found at the Woof! sourceforge
project site.

== Ruff! Sample Output

The Ruff! reference manual itself is an example of documentation
produced using Ruff!. However, since Ruff! supports Tcl 8.4, it does
not make use of any classes. For an example that documents classes,
see the Woof! reference manual.

